It got to the point where the United Gas Pipeline project was so big that these two individuals as consultants really couldn't handle it.
They needed an institutional connection.
So they came to A&M and we took on the project through the research foundation.
I understand the relation of the foundation.
The foundation is financially independent of the university and of the state, but dedicated to it.
so we could operate through that within the framework of the college.
As you look back on it, were there any of those research grants that which now obviously were really important steps to the to solidifying the program?
Was there one that now looks like a key one that led to many others?
I'd say the ONR one, the Hydrographic Office and the ONR one.
And it's interesting at that time, ONR told me they cannot support a new oceanography program.
They're dedicated to Scripps and Woods Hole.
And as long as they're going all right and they had some money left over, we might get a little.
But as time went on, they had not too large a contribution, but a steady one and also a flexible one.
So I'd say the ONR grants would be.
But then the National Science Fund came in with a very significant grant.
This was responsible because of Hugh McClellan on our faculty, who raised the money for a real ocean-going ship.
And he not only raised the money, he made the plans.
He got us a small freighter, a retired Army vessel, I think it was 179 feet.
Got a million dollars from the Science Foundation to convert it.
It worked out so well that they made six more of the same kind for other universities.
At that time, the competition was a class of ships.
They decided the only good ship would be one planned from the hull up for oceanography.
Those cost 20 million, and they weren't being too satisfactory.
And when they got them built, there wasn't money to operate them.
So everybody was happy to get this $1 million ship, which was fully capable of deep ocean work.
And like I say, they did six of them.
Hugh McClellan is responsible for that.
That was a grant that's very significant.
And as you were leading this program, I presume that Scripps and Woods Hole were kind of models for the quality of program you hope to get recognized here.
Is that right?
Well, the model for oceanography is difficult to define.
It's such a variety of things.
The Scripps curriculum was one that we followed.
That was the first one that had ever been offered, I think, in 1945.
And I was a student there.
That's the only time Harold Svredip was able to teach for two years in a row.
because he'd been in the field and all kinds of things.
So academically, I'd say Scripps was an ideal we tried to follow.
Research-wise, there's really no pattern.
Woods Hole, Columbus Island, oceanography was a hobby of his, and they got into anti-submarine warfare.
That was the big area, of course.
And Scripps goes into this from a more theoretical side of physics of acoustics underwater.
So we tried to approach that quality in that area.
That was one you could sort of define.
As the program here was developing, did A&M oceanographers have competitors?
Were there other institutions that A&M was going up against for grants and contracts?
Sure.
There were always peer reviews of proposals.
In the first meeting, let's see, President Bolton told me, don't hire anybody from University of Texas.
In other words, they were kind of our competitor.
They had hoped to build an oceanography program, and they had some good people, good things.
LSU had hoped to do the same thing, and Gordon Gunter, who directed that, I guess he directed that program, but he was also in Mississippi.
He tried to do this.
He wanted to join our faculty.
He really did, but we couldn't do that.
And Joel Hedgepeth, another one from Bodega Bay in California, he wanted.
But the question was, did we have competitors?
I'd say almost every university in the country hoped to build an oceanography program, and there are about 90 of them now, I believe, something like that.
There's an old book of curriculum on oceanography.
The...
College of Geoscience is established in 64, I believe you said.
Can you summarize how that came about?
I think there's a little difference of opinion on this.
John Calhoun tells me that there had been some consideration of a college before that, but my case is pretty direct and straight, I think, and I have quoted some of the letters.
As I said, when Frank Hubert became dean,
of Arts and Sciences, and we were becoming very large and we were growing very fast.
And as I see it, he decided that we should be a department like any other department.
I asked him for a research administrative assistant, and the answer was, well, departments do not have administrative assistants, that kind of thing.
We lost an instrument at sea.
He really raked me over the coals for this.
But if you've been out there with 40 knot winds and this thing swinging around, you have a little different view.
But I think the key thing was he had decided in 1959
that we're gonna be like other departments, that our salaries would have to be brought into, they were a little high because they were on soft money, a lot of them.
But for five years I felt, what's the word, stymied, stymied.
For example, we could not hire a new faculty member.
Although we'd grow maybe double in size, there was no allowance for additional administrative help or academic science.
We didn't look so good in the student-teacher ratio because we were graduate in PhD programs and heavily involved in research.
And so, okay, we were stymied.
And finally one year when everybody got big raises, our department did not.
So I asked him, how about this?
We have this growth and yet it looks like we're being held back.
And I got no answer.
And then I sent something else and I got no answer.
So the only thing I could do to force an answer was to resign, which I did.
And I said I would stay on for six months, and I did that.
Well, after two months, there'd been no action whatsoever to find a replacement, and I knew this would be difficult.
So I wrote a letter to the president, and I said, looks to me, since we have about 300 people and a couple million dollars of research, it looks to me like a simple replacement will not solve the problem.
that it looks like the best thing might be to make a college with a group of meteorology department, oceanography department, geology department, geophysics department, and I put in geography.
Later, Dean Deuce, D-U-C-E, told me he thought that was a stroke of genius to include geography with those sciences.
It had been very useful since then.
So I sent that letter to the president about October
I'd resigned in maybe June, July, something like that, August.
And not much happened here.
Well, the president, President Rudder, didn't know what to do.
I didn't talk to him through this period.
But what he did is what any good president would do.
He called in some consultants.
And you have to be awfully careful when you call in oceanography consultants.
One of these was Maurice Ewing, who was a Texan, a very famous seagoing Texan at Columbia University.
But his ideas about oceanography were completely different than what we'd built up here.
He didn't believe in classwork, academic work.
He believed to put a fellow on a boat for a couple of years and send him out.
He does well, give him a degree or something like this.
Well, that was one of the consultants.
Another one was a classmate of ours of Warren Worcester from
University of Washington.
He was most interested in international affairs, and we had not gotten that.
And so we got a, as a result of those conferences, President Rudder wrote a letter to us.
Actually, Dean Eurbert wrote this letter, and it was very discouraging.
Said we have to meet the student-teacher ratio, the department chairman has got to teach more, and a lot of things like that.
And Don Hood was in England at the time, and Bob Reed was trying to tell him what's going on.
He didn't know what to say.
But we had, as I mentioned, proposed a college of geosciences four or five months before.
And along about this time, in December, Hugh McClellan wrote a letter to the president, and he said, I am hurt.
that you've called on these consultants, but you have not talked to our people here.
Our people here are some of the best ones in the country.
Why don't you have a conversation with them?
So he appointed a committee and made Bob Reed chairman, and I was on it.
And we had about three weeks to make a recommendation.
We recommended what I had put in the letter in October and turned that report into the president.
I think this was January 22nd or so.
because that was the end of my six-month period, and the president was insisting that he'd do something by then.
And the college was approved, and when the college was approved, the whole world changed, the whole world changed.
Wayne Hall was vice president for academic affairs then?
Last I remember him, he was dean of the graduate school way back.
This was in 50, maybe.
So he had no part in this?
Not that I know of.
Okay.
I could say here that he had offered me, when he left the graduate office, he had offered me the job of dean of graduate school.
If he were capable of offering that, I don't know.
But I decided at the time when I would like to stay with the department.
So the recommendation to create a new college of geosciences with five departments.
I think it was five.
Including geography.
Yeah.
And the first dean was?
Now, that's a very interesting story.
They had to find a dean, of course, and my salary had been limited to 17,000, I think, at the time.
It's very hard to find deans of oceanography and meteorology in particular for 17,000.
But John Calhoun had come here in the 50s, and he'd come from Penn State, which is a very fine environmentally oriented university.
And he immediately got interested in oceanography.
He came over and talked.
And then he became appointed as the administrative representative to the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, UCAR.
And I was the science representative.
Well, John, on that
committee job, got acquainted with all the meteorology heads in the country and all the administrative people involved.
And he did very well.
First thing he knew, he was chairman of that committee.
And then he went to Washington in the Department of Interior for a year or so.
That does the fisheries work and the biological oceanography work.
And he became the most knowledgeable person on the perspective
of the oceanography department in the picture of the country and the international things.
And he got to know Horace Byers.
Byers was chairman of the UCAR committee when John came on.
He got to know Byers, and they got along very well.
Dr. Byers was then at Chicago?
That's correct.
So a dean's job came open, and John Calhoun knew that Byers would be a good dean.
And he heard a little clue that Byers wasn't too happy at Chicago.
Well, he mentioned to him this possibility.
And Byers said, no way.
He didn't want to leave Chicago.
He didn't want to be a dean.
And John Callahan said, well, why don't you come down for a visit anyhow, which he did.
And like I say, when anybody visits you, they become an instant Aggie if they get the treatment, especially.
So Byers was hired as a new dean at a salary double what mine had been.
And he was the best person in the country for this job.
He was an oceanographer as well, a meteorologist.
He was an experienced administrator.
He was author of a good textbook, meteorology, a member of the National Academy of Sciences, just a nice person.
So he became dean of the new college.
And then the president changed the whole outlook.
They made four new appointments in meteorology and oceanography and, I don't know, just a new world.
So programming, not only was there a new organization,
the program also expanded in its faculty numbers.
Yes.
Oh, yes.
As I said, it was stymied for five years, so it broke loose and then caught up.
That's the way I see it.
And what other general comments do you have about Dr. Byer's years as the dean?
Well, I remember one interesting thing at a cocktail party I just happened over here.
Somebody asked him, how in the world did a program like this ever develop here at Texas A&M?
And the dean's answer was, well, it's the most amazing series of coincidences.
So what occurs to me is, yes, we had some interesting coincidences.
We also wrote 400 research proposals and did a lot of hard work.
But he was an excellent dean.
Let's see, then who succeeded you as the department head?
Oh.
Or who were some key department heads?
Yeah, at the day my six months ended, Willis Pequenault.
Let's see, Bob Reed was appointed department head, which he held for two weeks.
And then after that, Willis Pequenault.
who was a biologist and a very smooth guy and a lot of experience in Washington and so on.
So Willis Pequenault became department head and remained so for several years, I don't know how many.
And his wife was also a marine scientist, Linda.
All right, you mentioned wife there.
Let's kind of divert our attention a bit.
Describe your, for you and your family,
living in College Station in the 60s.
You really want that?
Yes.
Okay.
My wife is with me.
We've been married 57 years.
And if I say anything that's a little off, I'll hear about it a little later today.
Virginia started the Student Wives Club and became a very active and important part of the total program.
And she also encouraged the faculty wives to get together.
So I have to give her a lot of credit for that.
What was life like in College Station?
We went for a ride often on Sundays.
We went over to the farms.
I took my daughter Janet, who is here today, along.
We saw a tree 40, 50 foot high.
The leaves had fallen off the tree, but it was full of buzzards.
There were 50 or 75 buzzards sitting in the tree.
interesting thing is they were all facing the same way same way I wonder what this was and then later I realized it was Sunday but that was one incident I remember another one another Sunday we went out and we went by the turkey farm and there were about a hundred turkeys there in the field and Janet got out of the car and she went gobble gobble gobble and those hundred turkeys answered back gobble gobble gobble and she'd gobble and they'd gobble that was the darndest thing I ever heard that was
flavor of living in College Station at that time.
It was very nice.
We were in the faculty dinner dance club.
I became chairman of that, and I'm real proud.
I stimulated it.
People, you couldn't tell how many people would come, so we sold them season tickets.
Very reasonable price, but if you bought a season ticket, then you're quite likely to come to the monthly affairs.
The faculty
I really was well acquainted and a lot of interchange going on, a very nice place to live, raise children.
Who were your, for you and your wife, who were your closest faculty friends outside the department?
Well, we had a slide group.
Remember, we used to have a lot of colored slides that you'd take pictures.
And then once a month, this group would get together to show their slides.
Marjorie Blank, whose husband was in geology, sort of started this thing.
Dr. Vance and his wife were members of it.
And the tendency seemed to be that the group represented different, not represented, but came from different departments around the campus.
And that was a group of friends that we...
were closest to.
But actually, the administrative wives were amazingly friendly.
When we first arrived, the president's wife and the dean's wife both came to visit us.
Dr. Harrington had found a house through Culpeper's for us, and we didn't take it.
We had a rent house for a while, and then we bought a house on 11th Street, real nice house, $11,000.
and lived there for a while.
But anyhow, through the dance club, those were all different kinds of parts of the college represented.
It was a college then, I guess, still.
And I might say something about that name sometime, too.
Go ahead.
We were a college, and Texas A&M became a university.
The question was, what name should it have?
Well, in the academic council, I proposed the name Texas A&M University.
And I did that because the research foundation had that name.
It was A without a period and M without a period.
It dropped the meaning agricultural and mechanical.
So I proposed that the college be named that.
And I think we got, what was it, 32 votes in the graduate council.
And it kind of died then for eight or nine months.
And then it came back and became a name.
It's used, I think it's a good name.
We received one letter from the Air Force, a once official letter, addressed to us the Department of, let's see, no, A&M College of Agricultural and Meteorology, instead of mechanical, agricultural and meteorologic.
How did I get into that?
No, talking about life here, were your children in schools here, or had they already finished high school?
Oh, they were, no, they were right in the middle of the school system.
So they were in the Indian consolidated schools?
That's correct.
How did you find them in terms of quality compared with what you had encountered in California, the local schools?
Well, we didn't try to compare them, but for our children, they were perfectly satisfactory.
I was a member of the school board for a while.
We knew the teachers, some of the teachers very well.
I think they were very good schools.
Down here on your notes of some single items you have listed as hiring test and diary.
What does that mean?
Well, when I hired people, including some of the ones that brought here from California, I had a 17-question test.
This was eighth grade mathematics.
And I found that that was very indicative of future possibilities.
If you got 15 or more, a good chance.
If you were down around 10, forget it.
It was, oh, if you're at latitude 50 and go 10 degrees north, where are you?
Rather simple.
They do one addition, one subtraction, one long division.
And that was my test.
Not allowed to give it anymore, at least in civil service.
And the other thing, the first year I was here, I kept notes every day.
all the things that happened.
I remember one thing was that I had 125 different interviews with Dr. Jack who took me to people to brief them on what we were doing.
Here on the campus?
No, around the state.
Oh.
Yeah, and the campus, yeah.
Let's see.
In those travels around the state, did you find any hesitation about the
appropriateness of Texas having an oceanography program in this state?
Were there some people who thought that was a waste of money?
Closest thing I can remember to this is the secretary that I hired in the beginning.
It was a custom then professors would often find in their homes rooms they could rent out to college people.
And my secretary got a room in the College of Agriculture professor's home.
And one day he said, Lucy, where do you work?
And she said, I work in the Department of Oceanography.
He said, oh, another one of those fads, it'll be gone in a year.
I guess that answers your question somewhat.
Somewhere I ran into somebody who thought that it was a study of tourism on the beach.
And I told them, no, it was far, far, far beyond that in its importance and so forth.
Now, down through the years, the relations between the department and later then the college and the research foundation remained very close.
Is that right?
Yes, we had a large percentage of the program of the foundation.
Dr. Jack had been much of his hopes for the future on oceanography.
And what was the other part of your question?
Well, after his passing, did the relationship remain strong with the foundation?
His assistant was Judy Davis, and she was there all the way through.
Howard Barlow was dean of engineering who had a kind of a,
close connection with the foundation, was the associate director, maybe something like that.
When Dr. Jackula passed away in 1953, there was considerable worry in the board of directors.
One reason being that they just borrowed $30,000 to put into our new ship.
A year later, Gib Gilchrist, who was the chairman of the board, made a review and he found that things were running fine.
Dr. Jackula's
Ideal, as he often told me, was to be an administrator such that if he were gone, it wouldn't make any difference.
He traveled one week, usually in the office one week.
So the foundation relationship stayed, except we had recommended Archie Kahan to be director, and he became director.
And he changed the philosophy, unfortunately, apparently, at best I could tell.
He was kind of a businessman.
And he found that the thing that impressed the board of directors was the increase in the cash balance.
So instead of putting as much money into the return research programs and helping them, he tried to build up this balance.
Dr. Jack, I remember one time I went in to him and I said, we need to go to some meetings for promotional purposes,
or to gather information.
We cannot charge a sponsored project for any of this.
I need some money without strings attached.
He said, well, how much do you need?
I said, well, about $5,000 a year.
He said, okay, we'll set it up.
But that attitude did not carry over into the later foundation.
As Hugh McClellan wrote in a letter, for some reason the foundation has not been as helpful as it used to be.
Back to administrators.
We don't have very much information about the personality of President and later Chancellor Gilchrist.
Describe him as a person, his values, his attitudes.
I didn't know him so very well, but he was a powerful individual in the state of Texas.
I think he'd been in the highway system and made a big success of that.
He was a big, powerful individual.
Was he big physically?
Yes.
And no nonsense.
No nonsense.
He was friendly, but pretty strictly business.
I think he was fair and active.
He made decisions.
and he stuck with them.
So I think he was a great influence on Texas A&M and the state of Texas.
All right, going back now to the college's leadership, Dr. Byers comes as dean, and then doesn't he move up to be vice president for academic affairs, and who succeeds him?
Yes, of course I wasn't here at that time, but I know that he went
to the vice president's position and did some very good work there.
Who succeeds him?
Well, as I say, I was not here during this period.
After Willis Pecklenow served as head of the department and Richard Geyer came in as head of the department, the deans
I guess Dr. Deuce must have come in about that time.
He was brought from Rhode Island, which is one of the most powerful programs nowadays in oceanography.
And then Geyer moved up to be dean also.
Is that right?
I don't know that.
No.
You left.
When did you leave?
69, 69.
So you leave when Mr. Rutter is still the president?
Yes.
Let's see.
Plans and hopes for the department to tie the sea and air together.
As you look back, do you feel that that was successful?
Up to a point, it sure was.
When I left, we had to make a report to the National Academy of Sciences every year.
At that time, 46% of the department was
oceanography or meteorology.
They put meteorology with oceanography in their reports.
And in addition, there were 10%, which they called sea air interaction.
That gets up to, let's see, 46, I think it was 46, about 50 some percent, which was sea air oriented.
My thought was in the beginning, we need a marine oriented,
program, not only ocean, but meteorology, the weather over the sea, the effect of the sea upon the weather, especially.
And so that was my goal, and I pretty much achieved it by the time I resigned.
Now, what I think happened after that, lacking a statement of
department objectives which would follow through different heads.
Each head that came in sort of warped things his direction.
And the first one was Will Specklenau who probably did not warp it too much but he was biologically oriented and he encouraged that part naturally.
And then came Dick Geyer who was just physically oriented.
Well now that was a big difference in emphasis.
My thought had been
If I want to build up the geological or geophysical, I've got a department of geology and a department of geophysical, get them all involved and they'll do all this.
And all we need is somebody to interact with them.
The same thing with chemistry and well, same thing with physics in a way.
So I had hoped that we could bring the entire college or university into marine work and make it
a marine universe.
And it just about has become that, actually.
So I think that the change in department heads, now Bill Bryant is present.
Department head is a geological oceanographer, petroleum industry in particular.
He was here before I left, so he's been here all through that one.
Worth known was a department head.
He was a physical oceanographer, a different type.